h1. Hydrogen

By Mike Schinkel <mike@newclarity.net> of NewClarity LLC

The vision for Hydrogen is to be a WordPress-specific command line tool for configuration management, site provisioning and site deployment/redeployment.

h2. Overview

Hydrogen allows professional WordPress developer to define "package manifests" (in "YAML format":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML#Language_elements)
that they can use to build a deployable "package" (in ZIP format) that can be deployed via FTP to web hosts and completely spun up as
a running website using the "CPanel API":http://docs.cpanel.net/twiki/bin/view/SoftwareDevelopmentKit/WebHome.

We'd love to see this tool become a defacto standard tool for professional WordPress site builders since there is not currently
a tool that addresses what Hydrogen addresses so "tell us":https://github.com/getsunrise/hydrogen/issues what you like about it,
what you don't like about it, and even better, contribute if you can.

h2. Current Functionality

The initial release can:

* Download and cache the latest version of WordPress core, plugins and themes.
* Queue and Build a package based on a package manifest.

h2. Planned Functionality

Future releases will be able to:

* Handle specific versions and revision levels (i.e. 3.3.1 vs. 3.3.x) of core, plugins, themes.
* Support pluggables, libraries, files in the uploads directory, etc.
* Provision a web server on a CPanel host.
* Upload a package file to a provisioned web server.
* Unpack a package file into correct directories on a provisioned web server.
* Configure initial site setting, menus, taxonomies and content.
* ...and a whole lot more.

h2. Current Concepts

* Hydrogen is a command-line tool using "h".
* Hydrogen views core, plugins and themes as "components."
* Hydrogen supports configuration files named .hydrogen in YAML format.
	* Hydrogen itselfs comes with a minimal config.
	* Hydrogen's .hydrogen file contains a 'config_dir' directory that you should set after installing Hydrogen.
	* Hydrogen merges .hydrogen files via a defined hierarchy.
	* One of the .hydrogen file must have a "site_dir" that points to the site install that will allow Hydrogen to include /wp-load.php.
	* Hydrogen chose YAML for configuration files because it is easier to read and hand edit than JSON or XML.
* Hydrogen has been implemented in PHP because it uses WordPress core for much of it's functionality.
* Hydrogen much have has been implemented in PHP because it uses WordPress core for much of it's functionality.
* The commands built for Hydrogen should also ultimately work as libraries within a plugin.
* Hydrogen supports a 'cache' directory where it downloads components.
* Hydrogen supports a 'package manifest' file in YAML format with '.hpm' extension.
* Hydrogen supports building a 'package' based on the package manifest file in ZIP format with an '.hpkg' extension.
* Hydrogen supports the concept of a "source" for components for which currently only "wordpress.org" is valid but with plans to support "github.com", "bitbucket.org" and many more.
* Hydrogen sources must support the concept of a unique version in some manner to support local caching of components.

h2. Working Commands

* cache-core - Download & cache latest released version of WordPress core.
* cache-plugin {plugin_slug} - Download & cache latest plugin by slug "{plugin_slug}"
* cache-theme {theme_slug} - - Download & cache latest theme by slug "{theme_slug}"

* queue-package {package_name} - Copy files from cache into queue subdirectory based upon a "{package_name}.hpm" package manifest file.
* build-package {package_name} - Combine queue files referenced in "{package_name}.hpm" to create a zipped "{package_name}.hpkg" file.

h2. Probably Future Commands

* deploy-package {package_name} {host_name} {domain} - Deploys test.hpkg to domain "{domain}" on host "{host_name}" defined by name in a .hydrogen config file.
* More...

h2. Supports

Currently Hydrogen only works on Mac OS X but would love to have others help add support for Linux and Windows.

h2. Installation

* Copy files to /usr/local/bin/hydrogen
* Edit 'config_dir' variable to point to a directory that will contain your cache, your queue and your specific .hydrogen file.
* Copy the .hydrogen-sample from the /usr/local/bin/hydrogen/samples directory to your 'config_dir' directory and rename to .hydrogen.
* Modify your "{config_dir}/.hydrogen" file
* Configure site_dir, cache_dir, queue_dir, and manifest_dir by replacing {your_username} your your Mac OS X username and {wp_load_site} with the directory where you have a working WordPress install.
* Add/configure "hosts" as applicable by following the syntax examples in the sample.
* Run "h show-help" from the command line to make sure it's working.

h2. Participation

* Please fork it and start sending pull requests.

* Ask questions "here":https://github.com/getsunrise/hydrogen/issues especially when things are not working.

* There is a Google Group for email discussion at "h-discuss":http://groups.google.com/group/h-discuss/.

h2. History

* 2012-06-03 - First Release during Atlanta "Finish Weekend":http://finishweekend.com

h2. License

See LICENSE.

